PROLOGUE

The Trojans
PRIAM, king of Troy
CASSANDRA, Priam&rsquo;s daughter, a soothsayer
Priam&rsquo;s sons
  TROILUS
  HECTOR
  PARIS
  HELENUS
  DEIPHOBUS
  BASTARD
ANDROMACHE, Hector&rsquo;s wife
Trojan leaders
  AENEAS
  ANTENOR
TROILUS&rsquo;S BOY
TROILUS&rsquo;S MAN
PARIS&rsquo;S SERVINGMAN
CRESSIDA
CALCHAS, her father
PANDARUS, her uncle
ALEXANDER, her servant

The Greeks
Greek leaders
  AGAMEMNON, the general
  NESTOR
  ULYSSES
  DIOMEDES
  MENELAUS, brother to Agamemnon
  AJAX
  ACHILLES
HELEN, Menelaus&rsquo;s wife and queen
PATROCLUS, Achilles&rsquo; favorite companion
MYRMIDONS, Achilles&rsquo; soldiers
THERSITES, cynical critic
DIOMEDES&rsquo; SERVINGMAN
Other Trojans and Greeks, Common Soldiers of Troy and Greece, Trumpeters, Attendants, Torchbearers

A never writer to an ever reader: news.

Eternal reader, you have here a new play, never staled
with the stage, never clapperclawed with the palms of
the vulgar, and yet passing full of the palm comical, for
it is a birth of your brain that never undertook anything
comical vainly. And were but the vain names of comedies
changed for the titles of commodities, or of plays
for pleas, you should see all those grand censors, that
now style them such vanities, flock to them for the
main grace of their gravities, especially this author’s
comedies, that are so framed to the life that they serve
for the most common commentaries of all the actions
of our lives, showing such a dexterity and power of wit
that the most displeased with plays are pleased with
his comedies. And all such dull and heavy-witted
worldlings as were never capable of the wit of a comedy,
coming by report of them to his representations,
have found that wit there that they never found in
themselves and have parted better witted than they
came, feeling an edge of wit set upon them more than
ever they dreamed they had brain to grind it on. So
much and such savored salt of wit is in his comedies
that they seem, for their height of pleasure, to be born
in that sea that brought forth Venus. Amongst all there
is none more witty than this; and had I time, I would
comment upon it, though I know it needs not, for so
much as will make you think your testern well
bestowed, but for so much worth as even poor I know
to be stuffed in it. It deserves such a labor as well as the
best comedy in Terence or Plautus. And believe this,
that when he is gone and his comedies out of sale, you
will scramble for them and set up a new English
Inquisition. Take this for a warning, and at the peril of
your pleasure’s loss, and judgment’s, refuse not nor like
this the less for not being sullied with the smoky breath
of the multitude, but thank fortune for the scape it
hath made amongst you, since by the grand possessors’
wills I believe you should have prayed for them rather
than been prayed. And so I leave all such to be prayed
for, for the states of their wits’ healths, that will not
praise it. Vale.


[Enter the Prologue in armor.]


PROLOGUE
In Troy there lies the scene. From isles of Greece
The princes orgulous, their high blood chafed,
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel war. Sixty and nine, that wore
Their crownets regal, from th&rsquo; Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia, and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures
The ravished Helen, Menelaus&rsquo; queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps; and that&rsquo;s the quarrel.
To Tenedos they come,
And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge
Their warlike fraughtage. Now on Dardan plains
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavilions. Priam&rsquo;s six-gated city--
Dardan and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And Antenorides--with massy staples
And corresponsive and fulfilling bolts,
Spar up the sons of Troy.
Now expectation, tickling skittish spirits
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard. And hither am I come,
A prologue armed, but not in confidence
Of author&rsquo;s pen or actor&rsquo;s voice, but suited
In like conditions as our argument,
To tell you, fair beholders, that our play
Leaps o&rsquo;er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle, starting thence away
To what may be digested in a play.
Like, or find fault; do as your pleasures are.
Now, good or bad, &rsquo;tis but the chance of war.
[Prologue exits.]